---
layout: post
title: Emotional Attachments and Commitments
date: 2004-06-01
tags: work
summary: Being impolite can be useful.
---

When I previously left the job to which I have just returned, I was accused of
something that bothered me greatly: lack of caring about a project. The project
in question was a database of vascular patients for a practice at a local
hospital. I had created the database according to specifications. I had designed
all the necessary forms, both paper and electronic, for data collection. In fact
I had even designed the system to allow data entry on a Palm Pilot so that the
surgeons could update and review information on current patients while they were
doing rounds. I even worked thirteen hours straight one night to finish writing
a program that would calculate, graph, and store everything about this one type
of research they were doing. One day, I was offered a job by another surgical
department (nephrology) because one aspect of the database that I was working on
pertained to their type of surgeries as well. I considered the job and was eager
to take it, especially since my vascular contract was giving me minimal hours.

A few days later I came in to find that I would no longer be working on the
nephrology section of the database. That section was to be unlinked from the
main database. They said that the nephrology department would be taking care of
that information from now on. I was to export all the data to a raw format
(Microsoft Excel) so that it could be given to them. That really bugged me,
since I had worked very hard to clean up all the data and configure the database
to properly handle it and maintain its integrity for future additions. Not only
that, I had spent <em>months</em> programming the scripts that would perform the
calculations. And since no one knew how the calculations were supposed to be
done, I even had to wade through medical literature to understand it. It needed
to be completely rewritten upwards of eight times in two different languages
(Perl and VBA) because we kept getting new information on the calculations that
completely contradicted the previous literature.

Removing the data from the database into an inert format? Fine, I can handle
that. Hours of work there, but no big deal. But the next thing they did went too
far. They told me that if I was to take the job with the nephrology department,
that "Since they disagreed with the conduct of the other department in their
acquisition of the database, if I was to accept their offer of employment, they
would have no choice but to terminate my contract."  That pissed me off, you can
be sure. I get offered work, but the current job threatens to fire me if try to
take both. If I were the same person then that I am now, I would have quit on
the spot and taken the other job. But I wasn't, and so I stayed. My only
consolation was that at least all of my hard work and months of programming
would still be benefiting people in the diagnosis and treatment of renal
patients. But then it hit me: the scripts were in the database, and I had
exported the data to another format for transfer. How the heck were they going
to use my scripts if they weren't being given the database that had them in it?
When I asked about it, I was told that they weren't being given to the other
department. Since they had paid me to work on programming the scripts, it was
their property. And since they disagreed with the other department, they weren't
giving them my scripts. Therefore, nothing I had done was going to help people
ever again. My employers were keeping scripts they weren't going to use out of
spite, and at the expense of people.

As for my return to work, I was ecstatic at first. When they called me back, I
was still lying in bed, and in that instant ideas started flooding to me. I had
fixes to half-a-dozen problems that had plagued their system for two-and-a-half
years. I even had an answer to a major legal problem they were having with
regards to the database and patient confidentiality. The moment I got into work,
I remembered why I had left. By the end of the first day, they had summarily
dismissed my ideas, reminded me that they thought this project was largely a
waste of time, and told me that they were short on money, so they weren't sure
how often they'd be able to have me come in.

On a far happier and less whiny and ranting note, I was talking to Katie last
night and she started me thinking about something. She mentioned that she had
the feminine quality of being emotionally attached to certain pieces of
jewelery. This led me to wonder what objects, if any I'm attached to. I thought
about it for a while, and what it came down to is that there's not really any
objects I'm attached to. I'm attached to people and ideas, nothing more. I mean
sure, my necklace, guitar, signet ring, and a couple of stuffed squirrels and a
lemur are important to me but if I were to lose them I'd survive without any
problem. Then I realized something that does matter to me: books. Not just my
books though, any copy of specific books. Thinking this through, I realized that
it wasn't the books themselves, but the words in the books, the books were just
easier ways of thinking about them. I've spent a good day thinking about that,
now, and I think I have an answer. Most people I know that like books are very
visual people. Take Brad for instance: when he reads a book, he gets immersed in
it to the exclusion of all else. He visualizes everything he reads about and can
actually see it in detail. On the other hand, when I read a book, I don't see a
damned thing. In fact, most of the descriptions bore the living crap out of me,
so I skim them making sure that there's nothing critical to the storyline
contained in them. What I never skip, though, is the dialogue. However this only
applies to novels. Whenever I'm reading something technical, such as a computer
programming text, I read every word. When I realized this, I knew what I'm
attached to: talking. I'm a talker, in case you haven't noticed. This blog entry
should be long enough to support that claim. The thing is, it's not just actual
talking that I care about. It's written, too. Anything that takes the form of a
dialogue between two people, be it talking, chatting on an instant messaging
service, or reading the words of an author to their readers, it's all the
same. I don't care about the books, but I do feel attached to them, so that
whenever I need I can pick one up and have a (admittedly one-sided) conversation
with it.

Well, I need to get up early tomorrow so that I can see Munch off to school. And
go to work, yay.
