---
layout: post
title: Today is not Yesterday
date: 2013-12-03
tags: fatherhood
summary: Reevaluting life in the context of being a father for the first time.
---

[Context: I wrote this lying on the visiting room couch in Saint Boniface
General Hospital's Mother and Child Ward the day after the birth of my first
child.]

Today is not yesterday: chronologically the change from one to the other is
clearly incremental, but mentally the two are only tenuously connected.

When you find out you're having a child, and aren't terribly naive, you expect
your day-to-day life will change. What I don't believe you can prepare for is
the emotional change that comes with being a parent. I have now met a tiny
person whom, with the quietest sound or briefest flicker of an expression,
produces the strongest emotions I have ever felt. And I'm someone that has a
widely known reputation for being heartless. This emotional change is something
that any parent can relate to and talk about, and is therefore not the topic of
this post. What was more unexpected for me was the mental change that came with
the birth of my child.

The first big mental shift I experienced happened when I had a really bad day,
the last of a series. It was like a switch flipped in my head, which isn't an
uncommon feeling for me, but this was the biggest switch that had ever been
flipped. I reacted to the experience with a set of decisions about how I would
live my life from that point forward. I also decided that night to later take a
road trip to Texas, so not all of those decisions were profound. Thinking about
it now, the major theme of those decisions was: be deliberate.

It was like a life-spanning "Tell me how you really feel" session. Come next
month, it will have been a decade since that really bad day.

For me, the second big mental shift was tonight, roughly thirty hours after
River was born, while I was thinking about bringing her home. While we've been
in the hospital, about forty-eight hours now, I've been telling Katie that we're
in a different world and that the normal rules of our life have no place in
here. When we leave, it's a new 'real life' that we return to. The imminence of
that new life has caused me to think hard about how I want to live the next
decade of my life. Lots of decisions were made, none of which I will be
disclosing publicly or privately. Despite that lack of detail, I'd like to say
that, broadly interpreted, this set of decisions have a rough theme: try.

Back in high school, my parents attended a parent-teacher interview, as they had
a dozen times before, and asked how I was doing. They were told roughly the same
thing as every time before: I was doing fine, was getting great marks, and
wasn't having any trouble with anything or anyone. But then they were told
something new: that in spite of all that, my teacher just didn't think that I
was trying. They agreed. They talked to me about it. I agreed. Nothing changed.

From the time that Katie's contractions started, I have actually been 'trying'.
Now that I've given this combination of my behaviour and mindset a name, I have
looked back on my life and counted the number of times I feel I've actually
'tried'. I didn't even need both hands.
